If you asked the average person what the
first color film was, the majority would
answer The Wizard of Oz. While the 1939
classic is a masterpiece of color design
that [music] has ingrained itself into
the popular consciousness, it was by no
means the first color film. You have to
go back over four decades before The
Wizard of Oz to [music] find the
earliest use of color in film. The many
experiments with various technologies
and aesthetics [music] of early color
film before 1939 highlight The Wizard of
Oz's influence on the evolution of color
filmm and the inspiration it continues
to provide filmmakers today.
As soon as cameras made movies possible
in the 1890s, [music] filmmakers
attempted to add color to their black
and white images. In order to do so,
many early filmmakers, such as George
Millier, handp painted their films frame
by frame, having to redo the process for
each individual print of the film. As
the film industry grew and production
companies replaced the lone showman,
companies like Path would streamline
[music] this process, setting up a
factory line of female colorists and
even creating stencils for each frame to
more accurately apply color dyes.
Production companies would charge
theaters more money for color prints
compared to a black and white version of
the same film in order to make this
involved colorization process
financially feasible. During the early
years of film, color wasn't used to
depict reality so much as it was to add
a visual flare. The results were
absolutely stunning. From [music] the
earliest Annabel Serpentine dances
colored to match the flittering lights
of the vaudeville stage to the
fantastical worlds of Melza's
adventures, you can see how much more
detail there is between the black and
white and color versions of Milier's A
trip to the moon. The characters more
easily stand out from the background
[music] and Mesa's fantastical world
comes to life with this added color.
Despite handdrawn colors extravagant
look, colorizing moving characters and
objects proved extremely difficult. For
example, in this George Millier's film,
the red on the devil's costume jumps
about wildly as he gestures and moves
about the frame. Even for static
backgrounds, the colors often jump
around outside the lines. And for the
more visually complex parts of the
image, they would be unnaturally baked
in one single color, such as this red
blob, struggling to cover the light
given off from a flittering flame. These
limitations didn't completely kill the
use of hand-drawn color in silent film.
However, later films like 1924's Greed
even used a handdrawn coloring process
for select scenes. The development of
machine printed stencils would slightly
improve the stabilization of these
colors, but it couldn't fix this fatal
flaw. The labor required to color each
individual frame quickly ballooned
budgets and added months onto
post-prouction. As films grew in length
from five to 10 minute shorts in the
early 20th century to hour-long
spectacles by the mid 1910s, hand
coloring and stenciling became an
increasingly unsustainable practice. In
the rare cases complete feature films
were colored by hand, such as the 1925
French film Srano de Bersiac,
post-prouction dragged on for years.
While shooting wrapped on the set in
1923, the nearly 2-hour film only hit
theaters 2 years later, the time used
for a team of dozens of technicians to
add color to each frame. As French film
companies struggled to standardize and
simplify this hand coloring process,
another simpler color process called
tinting came to dominate the industry
around the world. Tinting only required
the film prints to be soaked in liquid
solutions of color dye to add a single
color uniformally across the image,
changing the color of lighter parts of
the image the most. Sometimes a whole
film was dyed the same color, while most
films were dyed specific colors for
different scenes and shots. A similar
process also gained popularity during
this time called Tony, which manipulated
the color by chemically altering the
film strip silver particles to alter the
dark sections of the image. This could
be combined with tinting to create
striking visuals with more than just one
color. Alongside creating unique
visuals, tinting was also used
throughout the silent era to set the
mood or help viewers identify specific
locations. Blue tints were often used
for night scenes, [music] red for scenes
with fire, green for outdoor landscapes,
and yellow for the desert. Tinting
proved efficient and much cheaper than
hand coloring and quickly overtook the
film industry. Estimates today place 85%
of all Hollywood films featuring some
tinting by the early 1920s. Despite this
common use, the process still lacked the
ability to reproduce natural color on
screen. In order to capture color as we
see it in everyday life, cinema would
first need the work of numerous
inventors to craft equipment that could
photograph and then project realistic
color on screen.
After years of experiments, British
filmmaker George Albert Smith [music]
invented the first natural color process
dubbed Kinemacolor in 1907. In order to
capture and reproduce color on screen,
Smith's Kinemacolor camera used a
rotating red and green color filter to
take alternating images with one frame
shot through the red filter and the next
frame shot through the green filter. The
resulting film, as seen by this
surviving Kimacolor film strip, looks
black and white with just slight
differences to the hues in the
alternating images. [music] In order to
see color during the film screening,
Smith projected the film strip using a
speciallymade Kimacolor projector with a
rotating red and green filter identical
to the one used by his camera. As the
audiences saw these images projected
back through the projector spinning red
and green filter, [music]
the human eye combined both images as
one to see all the colors captured on
the red and green [music] spectrum.
While Canacolor was a huge step forward
in the development of color film, there
was still plenty of drawbacks to the
method. First, Kimacolor needed special
cameras and specially manufactured
projectors, making it incredibly
difficult to market commercially. Many
production companies simply couldn't
afford specially designed cameras, and
even more theaters couldn't afford a
novelty projector for just a small
handful of films. Second, the [music]
process only captured colors on a red
and green spectrum. No blue as far as
the eye could see, even when at the
ocean. And most of all, the filters
struggled to reproduce color of moving
subjects. Red and green blurs were
common when projecting these films, as
the red and green alternating images
were taken just a split second apart. As
these Kinacolor films were demonstrated
to the public, several reviewers of the
early process complained of headaches
and eye strain as a result of the
bouncing [music] colors. With these
technical issues, Kimacolor would hit
financial trouble in the mid1 1910s and
faded into irrelevance shortly
thereafter. Other longforgotten color
ventures from the Brewers color process
to Kodak's experimental Kodakchrome
process took up the baton and carrying
the search for a realistic color
forward. But only one company from this
time period would go on to drastically
alter the look of films for decades to
come. Here's where Technicolor enters
our story. More than two decades before
their role in making The Wizard of Oz,
the company produced a now lost color
feature film in 1917. For this film,
Technicolor had its very own color
system, [music] ditching the Kimacolor
rotating red and green filters and
opting instead for a colored prism in
the camera. They use mirrors to record a
red filtered and a green filtered image
on a filance strip at the same time.
Then they used a specially designed
projector to project both the red and
green images on top of each other
simultaneously attempting to eliminate
the blurriness inherent in the Kenma
color system. When screening their test
film to the public, however, the system
struggled to work. Lining up the
projected red and green images perfectly
on top of each other proved difficult
for even the most skilled projectionist.
Knowing this process would never be
commercially viable, the company went
back to the drawing board. Technicolor's
first foray into color feature film
making wasn't a complete loss, however,
as the beam splitting prism used inside
the camera would prove a fundamental
aspect to their future success. After
four full years of tinkering later,
Technicolor's Joseph Arthur Ball in 1921
came up with a new and improved color
process. Using the same beam splitter
from their previous process, Ball copied
the alternating red and green filtered
images onto two separate film strips,
one of those being dyed red and the
other dyed green before they were glued
back together. The now single strip of
colored film with the red images facing
one side and the green images facing the
other side could be run [music] through
any projector, unlocking previously
untapped theaters across the world.
Nicknamed twostrip technicolor. This
color process became the first regularly
used natural color system in Hollywood
films. 1922's the toll of the sea was
shot exclusively in twostrip technicolor
and would likely have been many
theatergoers first exposure to the
company's name. The film was met with
high praise for its color with film
daily calling it decidedly the best
thing that has been accomplished in
colors. While not caring for the story,
this same reviewer specifically called
out the improvements over past systems,
pointing out that the tones are clear,
unconfused, and the colors do not jump.
This is one particular satisfaction not
to have the various hues running into
each other where they are not intended
to combine. The outlines in this are
always very definite, and another
excellent feature of this process is
naturalness. The toll of the sea looks
like a decided advancement in this field
of endeavor. Despite its rave reviews
and the toll the seas successful
publicity, two strip tentacolor still
had plenty of technological limitations
just like its predecessors. The biggest
problem was that the two separate red
and green film strips cemented together
frequently separated while running
through projectors compromising numerous
screenings in theaters across the
country. Also, whenever the film strips
were scratched, a common occurrence when
a film was repeatedly screened, these
scratches were bright red and green,
much more apparent than on regular black
and white films. These issues limited
two-strip technicolor's widespread use
for entire feature films with only a
couple being made in the mid 1920s such
as Douglas Fairbanks's 1926
swashbuckling adventure, The Black
Pirate. Instead, the two-strip
tentacolor process was mostly used
throughout the 1920s in single scenes in
big budget spectacles. Films like MGM's
first big hit Ben her and the Phantom of
the Opera included brief color scenes
usually showing decadent costumes and
large spectacular sets. Cesop Deill ever
the showman used color in his 1927 Jesus
biopic the King of Kings to show both
the scandalous parties of Mary Magdalene
preconversion and to capture the
reverence of Jesus's resurrection on
Easter morning. Color was also used
during this time period to sell
Hollywood's biggest stars. Gloria
Swanson appeared in color in a dream
sequence in 1925's stage struck while
Buster Keaton filmed a short one minute
opening scene for his comedy Seven
Chances that same year. I even
occasionally appear in two strip and
while not a big Hollywood star I do talk
a lot about them doing deep dives into
silent and early film history. So make
sure you subscribe to see me in my next
big tentacolor video essay. But enough
of me. Let's dive back in. Not satisfied
with just shooting short color snippets
and otherwise black and white tinted
films, Tetacolor spent the mid1 1920s
tinkering again with their process, in
1928, Teacolor revamped their color
process, now able to print both red and
green images on a single film strip
without having to cement two separate
film strips together. With this new
change, making the film strips more
durable for projection, Teacolor
positioned itself rather well for the
early days of sound film just as it was
starting to take over Hollywood. As the
movie musical was born, 1929 and 1930
saw a massive boom in technicolor
featurelength films. Color proved to be
a perfect companion with the all
talking, all dancing, all singing
musical extravaganza, adding another
flourish to convince audiences to come
to the theater in the early days of the
Great Depression. While many of these
early sound color films were in the
previous style of goddy showmanship, a
few from this trend hinted at the
artistic capabilities color could
provide to filmmakers. 1930s The King of
Jazz, for instance, experimented with
color lighting for its musical review
numbers, providing a distinct look for
Paul Whiteitman's music and Duke
Ellington's Rapsidity and Blue,
substituting green and silver for the
blue that Technicolor's twostrip process
still could not capture. As audiences
tired of Hollywood's deluge of early
sound musical reviews, two strip still
had one last harrah in an unlikely
genre, horror. 1932's Dr. X and 1933's
The Mystery of the Wax Museum might have
been the last Hollywood feature film
shot entirely in the two-strip process,
but they similarly foreshadowed the
possibilities of color as more than just
a visual flare. Rather than using color
to show goddy costumes, of kicking
chorus girls, these two films used the
red green palette to create an eerie,
unsettling atmosphere. The uncanny look
of a world without a third of the color
wheel added to both films maniacal
serial killers dasterly deeds capturing
the grotesque science experiments of Dr.
X and the museum's cursed wax figures
with dramatic flare impossible to
replicate with the same power and black
and white even as films like the king of
jazz and Dr. X tests out creative ways
to use natural color as more than just a
simple gimmick to get butts and seats.
Tentacolor's limitations would need
further improvements to convince the
film industry to fully embrace their new
color process as the standard for
featurelength films. Tentacolor had long
saw their biggest hurdle as replicating
colors across the full spectrum. And
after years of laboratory experiments,
in 1932, Tennacolor would finally crack
the case, creating a completely revamped
approach to capturing natural color that
would forever change the trajectory of
film history.
The company's new process was dubbed
three strip. The new camera's beam
splitter now reflected red, green, and
blue light onto three separate black and
white film strips running through the
camera simultaneously. In
post-prouction, Technicolor would then
combine these three color negative film
strips alongside a black and white film
stock for image stability into one
positive film strip that could be shown
in any projector. With this new but
still expensive process, Technicolor
believed it had finally overcome the
major technological downfalls that had
limited the two-strip process's
potential to become fully adopted by the
film industry. With the checkered
complicated history of color technology
in the years prior, however, Tentacolor
still had to prove to the studios that
their streamlined new color process was
improved and reliable. To do just that,
Tentacolor struck an exclusive deal with
a young Walt Disney to test out their
new system in his short cartoons. 1932's
Flowers and Trees debuted to the
three-strip tentacolor process on film
to rave reviews from critics and
audiences alike. A blue sky, purple
flowers, and orange and yellow flames
showed off their respected colors
flawlessly. Following this Oscarinning
short cartoon, Disney produced all his
subsequent cartoons using the same new
three-strip tentacolor process,
separating himself from his competitors,
who still only had access to processes
that used the red green spectrum.
Despite the success of Disney's color
cartoons, Hollywood was still skeptical
of the new color process. Shooting live
color footage proved unique challenges
that weren't present in color animation.
Photographing in color required
extremely bright lights, both expensive
for the studio and a health hazard for
the actors. Cameramen would have to work
with the Tentacolor's company's loaned
out cameramen and would have to be
trained to the new cameras on company
time. Cinematographers, set designers,
and costume artists alike would also
have to relearn their respective crafts
to make room for color. Hollywood
tepidly dipped their toes into this new
process in 1934, shooting several short
liveaction films in three strip
tendolor. 1934's Oscar winning short
showed off the new technology
overloading the screen with color. Too
much that is every wall, every minor
background character, almost every minor
detail is a distinct color. On top of it
all, colored lights flash upon the
actors, trying to clumsily project their
inner emotion. Look, there's a red
spotlight in his face. Gee, he must be
angry. Lucaracha showed the promise of
the new three ship tentacolor,
reproducing natural color with flare,
but it also showed integrating the new
color scheme naturally into pictures
would be done through trial and error.
The technology might be available to
capture natural color on screen, [music]
but the aesthetics of color on film had
a long way to go. Three strip to color
continued its experiments with its first
feature film the next year in 1935's
Becky Sharp. Set in 19th century
England, the film uses its costumes in
upper class socialite homes to show off
its new palette of colors. More subdued
than Lukarach's color, Becky Sharp
focused on reproducing accurate skin
tones and aimed to better mesh color
with the film's narrative. Still, Becky
Sharp is too infatuated with its color
palette that it overtakes the film
completely, giving each character
unnaturally colored outfits and
overpowering the screen with so many
unnatural blue walls. We get it. You can
shoot blue on film. That doesn't mean
every wall has to be blue, though.
Watching Becky Sharp today, the film is
jarring with too many colors clashing
against each other. Like with every
experiment, though, there are successes
alongside the failures. For instance,
director Ruben Mimoleian tested out
low-key lighting setups that shrouded
his actors in the foreground and
darkness contrasted with a brighter
background. The dark blue mixed with the
yellow light on the statue in the
foreground of this balcony scene is a
stunning visual that would have been
impossible to capture in the two-strip
tentacolor process. In the same way,
despite its visual flashes, critics
agreed that the film tried too hard to
showcase its color with the New York
Times critic Andrew Senwald suggesting
that Tentacolor and future films try to
reduce this new and spectacular element
of color to a position in relation to
the film as a whole, where color will
impinge more violently upon the basic
photographic image than sound does
today. Technicolor took Senald's advice
with a company's next three-strip
Technicolor film, Trail of the Lonesome
Pine, taking a more subdued approach to
color. As the first Teacolor film shot
outdoors, the movie succeeds in large
part because it doesn't overload the
frame with a cacophony of colors,
relying on the natural landscape of blue
skies, the green trees, and the autumn
foliage to provide its color. The film's
cinematographer, William H. Green
discussed in the International
Photographer magazine how when designing
the look of the Trail of the Lonesome
Pine, they deliberately distanced
themselves from the colorly distracting
set design and costumeuming of the
actors of earlier color films. In the
Trail of the Lonesome Pine, when a
character naturally would wear a pair of
dirty black trousers, that's what he
wore in this film and not a pair of
bright red ones with green stripes
running down the sides. The audience
will not be conscious for the fact that
they are looking at color. They will
only see men and women going about the
business of life looking real. This
approach resulted in a much more
believable look, appeasing still
skeptical critics and exciting audiences
by the new possibilities of color,
making the film one of the top 10 box
office hits of 1936 with plenty of
critical praise. Subsequent 1930s
technicolor films followed the trail of
the Lonesome Pines's more subdued
approach as color began to be better
integrated into critical and box office
successes. Take the look of Norman
Maine's apartment in 1937's A Star Is
Born. There is still color, but the gold
frames and green curtains pop out from
the otherwise brown and drab apartment.
Without letting color dominate the
audience's attention, the set gives off
a simple but sophisticated vibe. The
perfect match for a welloff but
unassuming bachelor's apartment. This
subdued approach didn't mean color never
called attention to itself. However, A
Star Is Born and other mid1930s
tentacolor films still use color to make
impressive visuals, relying not on
bright hues overloading the frame like
in Becky Sharp, but through consistent
color palettes and various lighting
effects. The next years, The Adventures
of Robin Hood swung the pendulum back to
using a wide array of bright hues across
the color spectrum that the early three
strip tentacolor experiments employed.
However, 1938's The Adventures of Robin
Hood better integrated colors seamlessly
into the story without taking the
audience out of the film. Take for
example our introduction to the
villainous Sir Guy. While the shot has
vibrant blues, golds, and reds, they are
isolated to specific parts of the frame,
not trying to compete for our attention.
Contrast this shot with Lakaracha's
color lights drowning out the colors of
its dancers, or Becky Sharp's blue walls
and curtains distracting our focus from
the actions of characters in the
foreground. The natural browns and grays
seen in A Stars Born provide the
backdrop to let the vibrant colors in
the frame pop out and naturally direct
our eye to the main action and
characters in the scene. By blending the
exhibitionist and the subdued approaches
to color, The Adventures of Robin Hood
helped set the template for flamboyant
displays of color that fit narratively
within the story. Building on this more
consistent and streamlined use of color,
the films of 1939 would take this
approach to new heights and forever
cement and change our understanding
[music] of film color.
As we've seen, color oncreen didn't
start when Dorothy opened her sepiaone
door and walked into the colorful world
of Oz. But that doesn't mean this iconic
film didn't change the way we look at
color forever. Set in the fantastical
world of Oz, the film could capture
garish colors and not only make
narrative sense, but create a world
unlike anything committed to the screen
up until that point. Gone are the
neutral backgrounds of A Stars Born in
the Adventures of Robin Hood, replaced
instead by the glowing yellow brick
road, the radiant pink flowers, and the
neon green of the wizard's lair. In
front of those bright backdrops, we have
more expressive colors. Dorothy's iconic
blue blouse and most importantly the red
ruby slippers changed from the silver
slippers of Frank Bomb's original story
for a more appealing look on screen. All
the bright colors don't clash between
background and foreground [music] but
are seamlessly integrated into the
film's mess and scene. Prior to 1939,
Teeter was used mostly in dramas and
musicals, but the Wizard of Oz showed
color's potential in the fantasy genre,
creating another world altogether
different from our own reality. Several
months after the Wizard of Oz release,
Gone with the Wind would incorporate
dark and expressive lighting, typically
used in black and white cinematography
and further cement the formula and look
for color that become a mainstay in
1940s Hollywood and beyond. As 1939 drew
to a close with the Wizard of Oz and
Gone with the Winds critical successes
and enthusiastic audience reaction,
Three Strip Tentacolor had achieved what
no other color process had done before.
Winning over the public and the [music]
critics to become a welcome permanent
addition to the feature film going
experience. Despite this monumental
triumph, there would be more work to be
done before color was adopted for the
vast majority of films in Hollywood.
Large budgets, cumbersome technology,
and the artistic possibilities of black
and white cinematography still kept
color as an extra expense reserved for
select group of prestige studio releases
throughout much of the 1940s and50s. Not
until less expensive color processes
like Eastman color loosened
Technicolor's dominance over the film
industry in the ' 50s and60s [music] did
the number of color films produced in
Hollywood outnumber those made in black
and white in 1967. But that's a deep
dive for another time. Now nearly a
century removed from the days of the
earliest through ship tacic color films
and well over a century from the days of
handc colored and tinted film [music]
color processes, these early color films
still have the power to enrapture us
today. [music] From the fantastical
fantasies of millier to the uncanny but
extravagant looks of the red and greens
of two strip to the vibrant world of Oz
in an age of movies made for streaming
with drab gray browns [music] and
unintelligible shadows. And funny
enough, for many that would include the
recent Wicked films as well. [music]
These first color films are ripe for
rediscovery by audiences hungry for the
whole color spectrum. Perhaps some
modern-day filmmakers could even stand
to relearn the lessons of those color
pioneers who showed the world the vast
possibilities of cinematic color that we
have long taken for granted.
If you want to see some early films use
tinting to great effect, check out my 24
silent movie recommendations across 12
different genres video. If you want
another deep dive into early silent
cinema, go ahead and check out my video
essay breaking down the achievement and
myths surrounding the most controversial
silent movie ever